.TH BACKUP 1 "2026-06-11" "backup 0.1.0-dev" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
backup \- Ada command-line backup utility
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B backup
[options] OUT.zip INPUT...
.br
.B backup --list
ARCHIVE.zip [--list-json]
.br
.B backup --verify
ARCHIVE.zip [--list-json]
.br
.B backup --extract
ARCHIVE.zip --output-dir DIR [restore options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
backup scans input trees, applies ignore rules, writes ZIP archives, verifies
archives, restores selected paths, manages catalogs, and can upload or sync to
file, HTTP, HTTPS, S3-compatible, provider, and SSH/SFTP remotes.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --manifest
Write a manifest into the archive.
.TP
.B --deterministic
Use deterministic archive metadata where supported.
.TP
.B --compression=auto|store|deflate|bzip2|lzma|ppmd|zstd
Select compression policy. bzip2, bounded ZIP-LZMA, and zstd ZIP creation and unencrypted verification/extraction for classic and ZIP64 metadata are in-process through zlib. ZIP method ids are stable: bzip2=12, lzma=14, zstd=93 for created archives with legacy zstd method 20 accepted on read, and ppmd=98. ppmd ZIP creation and verification/extraction require local 7z support and fail closed when unavailable.
.TP
.B --json-errors
Emit machine-readable failure diagnostics.
.TP
.B --help-advanced
Print a fuller option summary covering remote, catalog, job, incremental, encryption, restore, and diagnostic options.
.TP
.B --catalog FILE
Attach catalog operations or post-run indexing.
.TP
.B --remote URL
Select a file, HTTP, HTTPS, S3-compatible, provider, or SSH/SFTP remote.
.TP
.B --create-job FILE
Write a template job configuration.
.TP
.B --run-job FILE
Run a persisted job configuration.
.SH ADVANCED OPTIONS
.TP
.B --remote URL
Select a file, HTTP, HTTPS, S3-compatible, provider, or SSH/SFTP remote. SSH and scp-like remote names are resolved through ssh_lib with SFTP transfer workflows.
.TP
.B --remote-config FILE
Read deterministic key=value remote settings including authentication, retry, timeout, TLS, and resume settings.
.TP
.B --upload, --sync, --restore-remote
Upload a newly created archive, reconcile a managed remote namespace, or download a remote archive to a local path.
.TP
.B --catalog FILE
Attach a catalog operation or request post-run indexing after archive creation or verification.
.TP
.B --index ARCHIVE, --query FIELD:VALUE
Import archive metadata into a catalog or query archive and entry metadata. Supported query fields include archive, date, content, source, lineage, remote, remote-verified, verification, manifest, encrypted, size, crc32, method, kind, and retention.
.TP
.B --list-archives, --list-contents, --verify-catalog
List catalog archive records, list catalog entry records, or validate catalog structure and archive references.
.TP
.B --create-job FILE, --run-job FILE, --job FILE
Create or run persisted key=value backup job files.
.TP
.B --retention-policy POLICY
Override the job retention policy for one run. Supported policy families are count, daily, weekly, monthly, and tiered.
.TP
.B --incremental-from ARCHIVE, --incremental-from-manifest FILE
Plan an incremental archive from a previous archive or manifest.
.TP
.B --encrypt, --cipher aes256-gcm
Write an encrypted archive envelope using the selected cipher.
.TP
.B --password-file FILE, --password-env NAME, --password-prompt
Select the password source for encryption or encrypted restore operations.
.SH FILES
Example job files are installed below share/examples/backup.
.SH SEE ALSO
README.md, REMOTE_TRANSPORT.md, CATALOG.md, JOBS_RETENTION.md
.TP
.B --remote-config
See README.md for details.
.TP
.B --remote-require-encrypted
See README.md for details.
.TP
.B --verify-catalog
See README.md for details.
.SH SHELL COMPLETION
Bash completion is provided by share/completions/backup.bash. Fish completion is provided by share/completions/backup.fish. PowerShell completion is provided by share/completions/backup.ps1. Zsh completion is provided by share/completions/_backup. Install each file into the matching shell completion directory, or source it where that shell supports sourcing, to enable option, enum-value, environment-variable, and file-path completion.
